I started a new job because the person in that role previously could not perform and it was a more important role. He is now in my old role. I'm training him up and want to transition as fast as possible so I can focus on my new role.

He doesn't show up and doesn't even tell us. There is no communication. He has no sense of urgency. He has the feeling that there will be someone to clean up his mistakes. I have been cleaning up his mistakes thus far since he is in training. I'm trying to support him and give him the benefit of the doubt, but it's wearing on me working two jobs at once. 

When is the right time to cut off? I'm trying to step away slowly. When is my effort in vain? how do I i know I've gotten to the end of my rope? 

Vikrant, you can't just not show up to work and not tell anyone. There are people who rely on you and especially as a process engineer, the manufacturing line relies on you. If I was not here, and there was a tool issue, and you decided not to show up one day, there would be a WIP buildup and it would hurt the entire factory. Things happen in life and sometimes we have emergencies and we have to deal with it, but the thing missing from your response is communication and responsibility. You did not show us that you care about your role or have respect for your responsibilities when you just avoid responding to everyone for the day. you said you were asleep and couldn't get back to me. I called you at 3pm and then you emailed back at 3:45 AM...no way you were sleeping for 12 hours. its now the boy who cried wolf. Everything happening in your life is an emergency and it all comes at the expense of work and your coworkers. We all have things going on in our lives, but we don't let it get in the way of our responsibilities. That is the difference. we figure out ways to do both. sometimes it means working more on days when there aren't issues. I don't think its an issue for you to work weird hours or work from home, but I'm not convinced you're doing any work when you work from home. I see no emails, no teams chats, nothing at all...that is a problem and Tom either hasn't caught on yet or is only starting to. 

Bad employees lower morale of those around them. I'm spending all this energy being annoyed and feeling slighted because of this extra work you're putting on me. I'm supposed to be in this new higher impact role and I'm being hamstrung by spending over half my time on my old job as I try to figure out my new one. And Camline, plating controller, processworks updates, python code hosting frameworks are all complex issues that take lots of bandwidth that I'm having issues coming up with. My new job is suffering becuase of your lack of urgency in learning and taking responsibility for the new role. 
\
You've been here over a year now and I find it so hard to believe you didn't have the access to all the most important systems. You didn't do shit the past year if you couldn't move anything through nugget or check automation logs...and you're getting paid more than me for doing less which is not fair. 

