# 83(b) tax form. Why you should do it on time. 

The 83(b) form tax form should be filled out within 30 days of receiving a stock grant consisting of restricted stock units which will vest over time. The form allows you to keep the cost basis of your grant the same as when you were granted the stock. The most tax efficient way to vest shares of stock. 

It is not necessary that one fill out the tax form, it is only of benefit to the grantee. Refer to the following example:

5,000 shares of Example LLC Stock is granted to an individual on Jan 1st. 2020 at a price of \\$0.001 per share on a 4 year vesting schedule. This means the total purchase price is \\$5.00, which is either paid or deducted from employee's pay. The vesting schedule releases $frac{1}{4}^{th}$ of the stock after the first year, and then $frac{1}{48}^{th}$ of the stock vests every month thereafter until the full amount is reached in 4 years. 


```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import math

s_grant = 0.001 # stock price on date of grant
n = 5000 # number of granted shares
total_granted = s_grant * n # total price of stock at grant date

print("Total purchase price: $ %0.2f" % (total_granted))
```

    Total purchase price: $ 5.00
    

## 83(b) form on time
________________________________
In the scenario that you submitted the 83(b) form on time, the total purchase price is the cost basis of your stock purchase. This means that you will not have to pay taxes over the years while your stock vests, and your only taxable income comes when you sell the stock. 

For example, you wait until Jan 1st. 2024 when your stock is fully vested. After some fundraising and increase in company valuation, the price of the stock is now \\$1,000, which is a 1,000,000x gain. Not bad!


```python
s_sale = 1000 # price at sale
total_sold = s_sale * n # total value of stock when sold

print("\nTotal amount of stock sale: $ %0.2f \n" % total_sold)

#look into how to add commas to printing format
```

    
    Total amount of stock sale: $ 5000000.00 
    
    

The 5,000 shares of stock are now worth \\$5M total. When you sell your stock on Jan 1st, 2024, your cost basis is still \\$0.001, so you will pay the capital gains tax on the difference.** 

\*\*assuming long term capital gains for the first 3 years and short term gains for the last year

\*\*and assuming the valuation of the company doesnt change in the 4 years between grant date and sell date


```python
cg_short = 0.4 # Short term capital gains rate
cg_long = 0.2 # long term capital gains rate

gains = total_sold - total_granted # total capital gains on increased company valuation

gains_short = gains * 0.25 # total gains subject to short term gains tax
gains_long = gains * 0.25 # total gains subject to long term gains tax

taxes = gains_short*cg_short + gains_long*cg_long
tax_rate = taxes/gains

print("\nTax burden of $ %0.2f on a capital gain of $ %0.2f for a %0.2f % tax rate\n" % (taxes, gains, tax_rate))

# double check this print 
```


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-51-03c6ffa96ff0> in <module>
         10 tax_rate = taxes/gains
         11 
    ---> 12 print("Tax burden of $ %0.2f on a capital gain of $ %0.2f for a %0.2f % tax rate" % (taxes, gains, tax_rate))
         13 
         14 # double check this print
    

    TypeError: not enough arguments for format string


## 83(b) form not on time 
________________________________

In this scenario, the individual doesn't submit the 83(b) form, which means the stock will vest accoridng to the schedule and the value of the stock will count as income yearly, and will be taxed every year as short term capital gains. Depending on different assumptions of company value over this time, the tax burden will differ. 

get into next:
- chosing grant price, then sale price, and then a linarly variable price over the 4 years (potentially closest to reality). then also choose parabolic valuation increase as "best case" scenario
- calculate with 1/48th granting schedule, not just every year. 



```python

```
