Hi nana

Personally, I don’t have a problem with Benjamin. Some of the stories of what he did after yall have broken up are shitty but i might be able to chalk that up to a mistakes and he’s learned. 

The one thing I can’t get over is his occupation of selling drugs. In my opinion, that should be a red flag. And by red flag I don’t mean something negative. By red flag I mean something that you learn that is a dealbreaker. Instant breakup. 

Your morality and sense of right and wrong have changed over the years. You used to sell weed and now as someone in recovery, you are acutely aware of the other side of the transaction. You have said you never want to be a part of that world again. I believe you. But this decision be morally justify Benjamin’s profession is flying in the face of that. 

To sell drugs, especially harder stuff like he does, you need to turn off a certain empathetic part of your brain. 

I have a lot of regret about a time in high school when I bought a lot of spice and then decided it wasn’t healthy and I didn’t want to smoke it. I then asked around to all my friends if they wanted to buy it. Since I had spent a lot of money on it and didn’t want to loose it all. Cameron wanted some. So I sold it to him. He eventually went through a tough time and got heavy into cough syrup, spice and eventually tried heroin. I feel directly responsible for getting him on the road to those harder things. I rationalized to myself “he would have gotten it anyways” but maybe he wouldn’t have… that is the same rational I’m sure Benjamin has. And it is not true. For some portion of his clients, probably. But a portion would not be able to feed their bad habits without him. 

Cameron made me his best man and doesn’t have many friends. I can say that since he is still good friends with me then it’s all forgiven, but I still feel remorse. I feel like I always need to do better by him since I did him dirty back then. That is what I’m worried about is missing with Benjamin. He has turned off that remorse part of his brain to justify his clients behavior. “They would get it anyway and I’m not contributing to their lives negatively” I can see that extrapolated into other relationship domains as well. 

It is a lack of accountability in certain areas of life that I know you have a very high level of accountability (sobriety). I feel like he would be willing to do other things that are means to an end. Lie, cheat, etc as long as he can justify it in his head “they would have gotten these consequences anyway, I’m just speeding up the process”. I think it is a dangerous character trait that may not come out for a while, but I worry is there and lurking below the surface for the right situation. 

I feel the same way about my friend Liam. He is shifty and kind of flaky. He makes plans and changes his mind often. Hes super smart and well spoken. And He’s never done anything against me, but I would never trust him in business or on anything really important. He makes little white lies and is lazy and sloppy in some little things he does, so if we were ever involved in any big important projects together, I feel like he might cut some corners, just like he does on the little stuff. 

Same for interviewing a candidate for a job. I look for attention to detail. If they send a cover letter with the wrong company name or send an email with typos or have other mistakes in their resume, it makes me think they will be sloppy in their work. The small things done right are an indicator that the big things will be done right. 

The bending of morality to become a drug dealer is one of the little things that could be bent further to more objectionable behavior in the future. That is the reason I’m against it as a profession and have the feelings I do about Benjamin. Yes it is dangerous and yes I don’t want you anywhere near someone who does it, even though he “doesn’t involve you”. But I think the bigger driver of my dislike is this mentality of cutting corners in his morality that could (and possibly already has) moved into other corners of his life. 

